---
layout: post
title: You are poorer than what you are told
subtitle: Inflation is when you pay fifteen dollars for the ten-dollar haircut you used to get for five dollars when you had hair. — Sam Ewing
tags: [inflation, economy]
comments: true
---

I am a Mathematician & Engineer by training and a Data Scientist in practice. What does a Data Scientist do? Put it simply, a Data Scientist blends Mathematics, Statistics, Computer Science and subject matter expertis to make sense of data. The role varies by industry, but the final goal of such a role is to help with a data-driven decision making process. The funny thing is that I got into it accidentally. I leave the story of how I got into it for later.
I have been digging into different datasets as part of my day job and also my side projects for a long time. Since pandemic I have got interested in datasets related to economy. In general, I have become more interested to understand how economy works (10,000 feet view), how money works, how Federal Reserve works, and many more "hows". I spent 2020 reading about these subjects and looking at specific datasets.
One important subject that I came across, which is relatively known to people (and affects people's life to a great extend), was **inflation**. For those who are not familiar with inflation, `the inflation rate is the percentage increase or decrease in prices during a specified period`. Why is this quantity important? One line answer: high/low inflation can make or break an economy. For example, if inflation is really high, let's say 10% per year, it means the same goods you buy today will be 10% more expensive next year. So you **expect** to pay more for the same goods next year. What you might think to do to overcome the inflation, at least temporarily, is to buy many of those goods (at least you will save money for sometime since the prices are expected to go up). Imagine others think the same way and they buy those goods too. The more demand (with a constant supply), the more the price of those goods. In other words, expectation of inflation itself creates more inflation. In this case, you might end up with 15% inflation. Here is another issue with high inflation that affects you personally. If your wage does not go up with inflation, you become poorer and poorer as time goes by. There are many more reasons why high inflation is not good, but believe me you do not want high inflation. On the other hand, low inflation is not good either (and negative inflation which Japan experienced is even worse). If you know the price of a good is going to stay the same or to go down, would you buy it now? Maybe you do maybe you do not. Usually low inflation results in low consumption. Low consumption creates low growth economy plus other problems down the road.
For aforementioned reasons and many more, central banks set inflation target and try to **stabilize** the price of goods. In the US, Federal Reserve has two mandates:

0. Price stability
0. Maximum sustainable employment

You might ask "well these are great mandates, but how does Federal reserve achieve those?" The answer to such a question is lengthy. I will get into it in future. In a nutshell, Federal Reserve has many tools in its disposal to use to achieve such mandates. Adjusting the interest rate, printing money, quantitate easing are just a few examples of those tools. Of course some of these tools have/are abused through time. I will address those in future as well. Long story short, we have an entity in the U.S that is responsible to achieve above mandates by using some important **tools**.

Federal Reserve can only use those tools *properly* if it knows what the inflation rate (among other factors) is. In other words, it can only change what it measures, right? How does Federal reserve measure inflation? This is a difficult question to answer.

0. What goods should we take into consideration when we calculate the inflation? 
0. What regions should be considered in our calculation? 
0. What time frame? 
0. The quality of life usually increases over time, how do we take that into account when we calculate the inflation? 

Simple questions usually do not have straightforward answers. Thankfully, we have an organization in the U.S. to answer (some) of these questions and to measure  just that. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics is responsible to take these questions (and many more) into account and to measure (and report) the inflation on a regular basis. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics uses CPI to measure inflation. `The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a measure of the average change over time in the prices paid by urban consumers for a market basket of consumer goods and services. Indexes are available for the U.S. and various geographic areas`.

{% include image.html url="/assets/img/cpi-u.png" description="Fig 1. CPI-U example" %}

Figure 1 shows the sample of what U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports on a regular basis. For example, "food at home" CPI was 243.110 in Jan 2020 and it is 252.107 in Jan 2021. The percentage change is about 3.7%. The Bureau then combine all the percentages (some sort of weighted average) to come up with one number. **That number is the inflation rate reported through mainstream media**. Wait, what?? I know, I know,... the devil is in details. Just bare with me to explain the flaws in these types of aggregation. 
#### There is a level of subjectivity
How does Bureau come up with the categories? For example, **food** is a broad category and representing it with 6, 7 sub categories introduce some level of subjectivity. Bureau uses different surveys, research etc. to create a basket of goods, but still there is some levels of subjectivity in the end of the day. Be careful when you go through their reports. 
#### Average might not be a good statistics
Average is prone to outlier and might not be a good statistics to use. Due to variance in price of goods based on the characteristics of *goods and services*, it is wise to look at other statistics such as Median, and percentiles. With average, the story is summarized in one word and one word story is almost always misleading. 
#### Whenever you aggregate, you scarify something
No matter how delicate Bureau carries out the calculation, the aggregation *could* be very misleading. For example, if people in the US mostly eat Beef and Beef has been weighted heavily in the calculation, the final number will be influenced by beef more than let's say chicken. Again, no matter how you weight the items, as soon as you aggregate the numbers, you are dealing with *average* inflation. If you eat chicken a lot, the number represented here might not reflect how much your wallet is affected by inflation. Another level of aggregation occurs among categories. For example, food and energy must be weighted somehow. If you are heavy energy user, but not much food (which I do not recommend), the number reflected here might not be applicable to you.
#### Price depends on the region
Another flaw of these types of report is that the numbers are averaged among regions throughout the country. Sure, Bureau publishes reports for each region, but when the inflation is reported, it is only one number. This means that you might suffer from inflation heavily, and I might suffer from it mildly, but on average, the inflation is modest! 
#### Price depends on sub regions
Even when you look at one particular region, let's say Dallas metroplex (DFW), there is so much variance within DFW itself. For example, there are pockets of neighborhoods that might be affected heavily by inflation and other pockets not much. 
#### In times of shock, inflation increases 
Whenever some shocks such as 2008 meltdown, 2000 tech bobble, 2020 pandemic, etc. happens, Federal Reserve uses its **tools** to stimulate the growth. It usually drops the interest rate, prints money and uses quantitative easing. When these tools usually results in high liquify of cash (cheap cash) which in fact result in high inflation.
There are, of course, more issues with the way the numbers are reported and interpreted. But I guess you got my points here. The number that Federal Reserve is targeting (2% inflation, recently changed to *average* 2%) might not do any good to you. It has been averages/aggregated so much, it does not reflect **your** lifestyle and most importantly, it could be very misleading. As a matter of fact, if you are planning your retirement, planning to buy a house, planning to buy a car etc. you should **really think twice** before relying on the reports. See figure 2. I leave you make your own conclusoin on *inflation* in housing market. Is it 2%?
{% include image.html url="/assets/img/zillow-home-price.png" description="Fig 2. US home prices since 2012" %} 
#### Bottom line
I analyze, slice and dice data daily. At the same time, I am extremely careful about the limitation of data and danger of letting it fool me. Inflation is real, Bureau is doing its best to capture **average** price movement. But the story told to you differs from reality. There is so much variance in prices depending on regions, sub-regions, your style of living and many more factors. Just remember that what you hear in the news is just *one number*. Stories that are told with one word are not complete! Until next time.